kernel/Documentation/admin-guide/cifs/todo.rst, before:

====
TODO
====

As of 6.7 kernel. See https://wiki.samba.org/index.php/LinuxCIFSKernel
for list of features added by release

A Partial List of Missing Features
==================================

Contributions are welcome.  There are plenty of opportunities
for visible, important contributions to this module.  Here
is a partial list of the known problems and missing features:

a) SMB3 (and SMB3.1.1) missing optional features:
   multichannel performance optimizations, algorithmic channel selection,
   directory leases optimizations,
   support for faster packet signing (GMAC),
   support for compression over the network,
   T10 copy offload ie "ODX" (copy chunk, and "Duplicate Extents" ioctl
   are currently the only two server side copy mechanisms supported)

b) Better optimized compounding and error handling for sparse file support,
   perhaps addition of new optional SMB3.1.1 fsctls to make collapse range
   and insert range more atomic

c) Support for SMB3.1.1 over QUIC (and perhaps other socket based protocols
   like SCTP)

d) quota support (needs minor kernel change since quota calls otherwise
   won't make it to network filesystems or deviceless filesystems).

e) Additional use cases can be optimized to use "compounding" (e.g.
   open/query/close and open/setinfo/close) to reduce the number of
   roundtrips to the server and improve performance. Various cases
   (stat, statfs, create, unlink, mkdir, xattrs) already have been improved by
   using compounding but more can be done. In addition we could
   significantly reduce redundant opens by using deferred close (with
   handle caching leases) and better using reference counters on file
   handles.

f) Finish inotify support so kde and gnome file list windows
   will autorefresh (partially complete by Asser). Needs minor kernel
   vfs change to support removing D_NOTIFY on a file.

g) Add GUI tool to configure /proc/fs/cifs settings and for display of
   the CIFS statistics (started)

h) implement support for security and trusted categories of xattrs
   (requires minor protocol extension) to enable better support for SELINUX

i) Add support for tree connect contexts (see MS-SMB2) a new SMB3.1.1 protocol
   feature (may be especially useful for virtualization).

j) Create UID mapping facility so server UIDs can be mapped on a per
   mount or a per server basis to client UIDs or nobody if no mapping
   exists. Also better integration with winbind for resolving SID owners

k) Add tools to take advantage of more smb3 specific ioctls and features
   (passthrough ioctl/fsctl is now implemented in cifs.ko to allow
   sending various SMB3 fsctls and query info and set info calls
   directly from user space) Add tools to make setting various non-POSIX
   metadata attributes easier from tools (e.g. extending what was done
   in smb-info tool).

l) encrypted file support (currently the attribute showing the file is
   encrypted on the server is reported, but changing the attribute is not
   supported).

m) improved stats gathering tools (perhaps integration with nfsometer?)
   to extend and make easier to use what is currently in /proc/fs/cifs/Stats

n) Add support for claims based ACLs ("DAC")

o) mount helper GUI (to simplify the various configuration options on mount)

p) Expand support for witness protocol to allow for notification of share
   move, and server network adapter changes. Currently only notifications by
   the witness protocol for server move is supported by the Linux client.

q) Allow mount.cifs to be more verbose in reporting errors with dialect
   or unsupported feature errors. This would now be easier due to the
   implementation of the new mount API.

r) updating cifs documentation, and user guide.

s) Addressing bugs found by running a broader set of xfstests in standard
   file system xfstest suite.

t) split cifs and smb3 support into separate modules so legacy (and less
   secure) CIFS dialect can be disabled in environments that don't need it
   and simplify the code.

v) Additional testing of POSIX Extensions for SMB3.1.1

w) Support for the Mac SMB3.1.1 extensions to improve interop with Apple servers

x) Support for additional authentication options (e.g. IAKERB, peer-to-peer
   Kerberos, SCRAM and others supported by existing servers)

y) Improved tracing, more eBPF trace points, better scripts for performance
   analysis

Known Bugs
==========

See https://bugzilla.samba.org - search on product "CifsVFS" for
current bug list.  Also check http://bugzilla.kernel.org (Product = File System, Component = CIFS)
and xfstest results e.g. https://wiki.samba.org/index.php/Xfstest-results-smb3

Misc testing to do
==================
1) check out max path names and max path name components against various server
   types. Try nested symlinks (8 deep). Return max path name in stat -f information

2) Improve xfstest's cifs/smb3 enablement and adapt xfstests where needed to test
   cifs/smb3 better

3) Additional performance testing and optimization using iozone and similar -
   there are some easy changes that can be done to parallelize sequential writes,
   and when signing is disabled to request larger read sizes (larger than
   negotiated size) and send larger write sizes to modern servers.

4) More exhaustively test against less common servers

5) Continue to extend the smb3 "buildbot" which does automated xfstesting
   against Windows, Samba and Azure currently - to add additional tests and
   to allow the buildbot to execute the tests faster. The URL for the
   buildbot is: http://smb3-test-rhel-75.southcentralus.cloudapp.azure.com

6) Address various coverity warnings (most are not bugs per-se, but
   the more warnings are addressed, the easier it is to spot real
   problems that static analyzers will point out in the future).

Commit message:

Modified Kernel Build for Main

kernel/Documentation/admin-guide/cifs/todo.rst, after:

====
TODO
====

Version 2.14 December 21, 2018

A Partial List of Missing Features
==================================

Contributions are welcome.  There are plenty of opportunities
for visible, important contributions to this module.  Here
is a partial list of the known problems and missing features:

a) SMB3 (and SMB3.1.1) missing optional features:

   - multichannel (partially integrated), integration of multichannel with RDMA
   - directory leases (improved metadata caching). Currently only implemented for root dir
   - T10 copy offload ie "ODX" (copy chunk, and "Duplicate Extents" ioctl
     currently the only two server side copy mechanisms supported)

b) improved sparse file support (fiemap and SEEK_HOLE are implemented
   but additional features would be supportable by the protocol such
   as FALLOC_FL_COLLAPSE_RANGE and FALLOC_FL_INSERT_RANGE)

c) Directory entry caching relies on a 1 second timer, rather than
   using Directory Leases, currently only the root file handle is cached longer
   by leveraging Directory Leases

d) quota support (needs minor kernel change since quota calls otherwise
    won't make it to network filesystems or deviceless filesystems).

e) Additional use cases can be optimized to use "compounding" (e.g.
   open/query/close and open/setinfo/close) to reduce the number of
   roundtrips to the server and improve performance. Various cases
   (stat, statfs, create, unlink, mkdir, xattrs) already have been improved by
   using compounding but more can be done. In addition we could
   significantly reduce redundant opens by using deferred close (with
   handle caching leases) and better using reference counters on file
   handles.

f) Finish inotify support so kde and gnome file list windows
   will autorefresh (partially complete by Asser). Needs minor kernel
   vfs change to support removing D_NOTIFY on a file.

g) Add GUI tool to configure /proc/fs/cifs settings and for display of
   the CIFS statistics (started)

h) implement support for security and trusted categories of xattrs
   (requires minor protocol extension) to enable better support for SELINUX

i) Add support for tree connect contexts (see MS-SMB2) a new SMB3.1.1 protocol
   feature (may be especially useful for virtualization).

j) Create UID mapping facility so server UIDs can be mapped on a per
   mount or a per server basis to client UIDs or nobody if no mapping
   exists. Also better integration with winbind for resolving SID owners

k) Add tools to take advantage of more smb3 specific ioctls and features
   (passthrough ioctl/fsctl is now implemented in cifs.ko to allow
   sending various SMB3 fsctls and query info and set info calls
   directly from user space) Add tools to make setting various non-POSIX
   metadata attributes easier from tools (e.g. extending what was done
   in smb-info tool).

l) encrypted file support (currently the attribute showing the file is
   encrypted on the server is reported, but changing the attribute is not
   supported).

m) improved stats gathering tools (perhaps integration with nfsometer?)
   to extend and make easier to use what is currently in /proc/fs/cifs/Stats

n) Add support for claims based ACLs ("DAC")

o) mount helper GUI (to simplify the various configuration options on mount)

p) Expand support for witness protocol to allow for notification of share
   move, and server network adapter changes. Currently only notifications by
   the witness protocol for server move is supported by the Linux client.

q) Allow mount.cifs to be more verbose in reporting errors with dialect
   or unsupported feature errors. This would now be easier due to the
   implementation of the new mount API.

r) updating cifs documentation, and user guide.

s) Addressing bugs found by running a broader set of xfstests in standard
   file system xfstest suite.

t) split cifs and smb3 support into separate modules so legacy (and less
   secure) CIFS dialect can be disabled in environments that don't need it
   and simplify the code.

v) Additional testing of POSIX Extensions for SMB3.1.1

w) Add support for additional strong encryption types, and additional spnego
   authentication mechanisms (see MS-SMB2).  GCM-256 is now partially implemented.

x) Finish support for SMB3.1.1 compression

Known Bugs
==========

See https://bugzilla.samba.org - search on product "CifsVFS" for
current bug list.  Also check http://bugzilla.kernel.org (Product = File System, Component = CIFS)

1) existing symbolic links (Windows reparse points) are recognized but
   can not be created remotely. They are implemented for Samba and those that
   support the CIFS Unix extensions, although earlier versions of Samba
   overly restrict the pathnames.
2) follow_link and readdir code does not follow dfs junctions
   but recognizes them

Misc testing to do
==================
1) check out max path names and max path name components against various server
   types. Try nested symlinks (8 deep). Return max path name in stat -f information

2) Improve xfstest's cifs/smb3 enablement and adapt xfstests where needed to test
   cifs/smb3 better

3) Additional performance testing and optimization using iozone and similar -
   there are some easy changes that can be done to parallelize sequential writes,
   and when signing is disabled to request larger read sizes (larger than
   negotiated size) and send larger write sizes to modern servers.

4) More exhaustively test against less common servers

5) Continue to extend the smb3 "buildbot" which does automated xfstesting
   against Windows, Samba and Azure currently - to add additional tests and
   to allow the buildbot to execute the tests faster. The URL for the
   buildbot is: http://smb3-test-rhel-75.southcentralus.cloudapp.azure.com

6) Address various coverity warnings (most are not bugs per-se, but
   the more warnings are addressed, the easier it is to spot real
   problems that static analyzers will point out in the future).
